this is alternative radio I'm David Barr
Sammy on this edition of a are features
robert Parry on the art of investigative
journalism getting to the roots of a
story is often a long and complicated
process while newsrooms shrink and
budgets are cut fewer and fewer editors
are willing to assign reporters to
digging out recondite facts robert Parry
is a premier investigative journalist
who has broken a number of important
stories he's the author of fooling
America and trick or treason he's worked
on PBS's frontline series Robert Perry's
the editor of the consortium a new
independent biweekly newsletter
I talked with robert Parry at the media
and democracy congress in San Francisco
I asked him about his background in
journalism well my dad was in journalism
he ran a paper in Massachusetts so it
came in through I came through the
family and I worked there for a while
when I was going through college every
summer I had to like work in the back
shop or do circulation or do some grungy
job in journalism and it was good though
I mean I was able then to develop a
certain interest in you know in
different parts of the business but I
wanted to do reporting so I worked for a
while
at this paper in Framingham
Massachusetts and then went to the AP in
1974 was in Baltimore in Providence
Rhode Island and then went to Washington
in 1977 to join the AP national staff
worked on the desk because you have to
do at AP for a year or so and then went
to the hill Capitol Hill uncovered
economic issues and some did some
investigations and then in 1980 at the
end of 1980 I was appointed to the AP
special assignment team which is their
investigative unit and and I and that's
where I started doing work on some of
the Reagan scandals me what was
interesting especially also after the
Vietnam War period and the things we
learned in the 60s and the 70s
worse were whether or not there were
abuses of power that affected our
democracy were there were was lying
becoming an instrumental part of the way
government worked were there abuses in
the national security apparatus that we
had seen in the 60s and 70s were they
continuing on into the into the 80s so
those kinds of questions I thought were
of interest and I think that's what led
me to some of the stories I did plus you
know in Central America you had an awful
series of events I mean there was mass
murder going on
which the United States was was funding
we were training some of the people who
are carrying out these atrocities we
were and then I think almost most
cynical of all the United States
government was covering up what had
happened so when you'd find out as some
people did who were courageously
reporting in Central America at the time
about these desc want operations that
would come back to Washington and the
government would lie about it and say
nothing happened and they'd investigated
and was all cleared up and and and so
much of the mainstream press at that
point was because it was under some
pressure to but was not being critical
enough of how the government was
functioning in that area once a
journalist was Raymond Bonnar of the New
York Times who reported on the el mozote
a massacre in El Salvador what happened
to Bonner
well the el mozote a case is an
important one because not that it was
entirely isolated in El Salvador there
were hundreds and thousands of people
being murdered each week and month and
the United States government was aware
of all that but under President Reagan
for geopolitical concerns and so forth
those actions were being covered up in
effect what we saw happening in Central
America was kind of a phoenix program
which was was with the goal it with
phoenix program being what happened in
vietnam where the CIA organized special
teams to go out and kill the cadre the
Vietcong cadre and in the view of the
CIA it was very successful and that they
did wipe out much of the Vietcong cadre
now the North Vietnamese sent in troops
to replace some of those people so the
you know the u.s. size still lost the
war but the agency people thought it was
very successful so they in a sense
replicated that for Central America and
they had so there were there were teams
of people who were trained and supported
who were going out and doing massacres
in throughout Central America
particularly El Salvador in Guatemala
now in right around Christmastime in
1981 a the first u.s. fully trained
battalion the ATLA cat battalion of the
Salvadoran army swept through northeast
El Salvador and they came upon a town
called el mozote a where ironically the
people were not supporting of the
guerrillas so they weren't afraid of the
military as some of the guerrilla
stronghold where they people fled but it
didn't matter the the goal was to wipe
out everybody so the army surrounded the
town they took everybody captive they
took out the the men the fathers first
and executed them and then they took out
the the mothers of women and they
executed them in front of the kids
and then they took out the children and
some of the girls were raped and then
the children were slaughtered -
everybody was killed
the whole town except for a couple
people who had escaped or watched it
from the from the fringes and this was
when Raymond Bonnar and Alma Jima Prieta
of the Washington Post bond was with the
New York Times went to the area very
heroically this was not it this is not
without great danger and was when
journalists were still trying to do
honest work which we sort of stopped
doing it seems like now but then there
was still that commitment and Bonner
went out and came back with the story as
did Alma and it appeared in early 1982
in the front page of the New York Times
that there'd been this horrible massacre
the response of the United States
government the Reagan administration was
to send officials to the hill Tom Enders
particularly in Elliott Abrams and
testify to Congress that nothing had
happened that there were still lots of
people living in el mozote it was kind
of that we kind of laughed and it was
kind of funny and they they said they'd
investigated and of course the Democrats
kind of accepted it as Democrats are
want to do these days and and and then
the right-wing media attack groups
through accuracy and media types came in
and attacked Bonner as for spreading
communist disinformation and so forth
and it was part of this effort
to stigmatize controversial eyes and
destroy Bono's reputation and career and
it was very successful
the New York Times pulled him out of El
Salvador he was stuck on some minor
assignment and eventually was pushed out
of the newspaper altogether that that
that action which was was which was well
I was talking to some people from the US
Embassy in El Salvador at the time and
they were gloating about their great
success and having writ gotten rid of
this reporter who was causing them
trouble
but what happened also was that this was
being replicated against other
journalists who were telling the truth
about Central America and those of us up
in Washington I was based in DC who were
trying to tell the truth there the the
same sort of approach was taken the
these that what these media attack dogs
would come at you smear you write
letters controversial eyes you call your
work agenda driven biased it's a Teresa
dura and so telling the truth became
increasingly dangerous both in Central
America for reporters who wanted to
maintain a livelihood in a career and
for those of us in DC who who were
trying to tell the truth there too and
at about this time during the early
Reagan years National Public Radio also
came under attack from the
administration well right there was a
there was a group which which actually
was very important but we we spent very
little attention on which was called the
public diplomacy apparatus we don't know
a lot about this from the documents that
came out of iran-contra and what
happened with the public diplomacy
apparatus was that in around 1982 rot
this at the same time as the Bonner
mater bill Casey who was Director of
Central Intelligence was very concerned
that the that too much of the
information about Central America was
getting out straight to the American
people and they wanted to do something
which they called perception management
that was the phrase they used and so he
Cayce had sent over to the National
Security Council his top propagandist a
man named Walter Raymond jr. whose
career had been with the CIA
Raymond leaves the CIA sort of
technically and but then becomes head of
this operation called public diplomacy
and they set up an office at the State
Department Otto Reich is the director
this department and this departments job
is to is to manage the perceptions of
the American people and Central America
and a few other issues that the CIA is
interested in Casey Casey monitored and
oversaw this program while CIA director
which is supposedly against the law but
their explanation of that was well Casey
was not wearing his CIA hat when he did
that he was wearing his advisor to the
president hat which is what they
testified about when he finally came out
in public but what happened with with
this public diplomacy operation was they
would go around and pressure editors
bureau chiefs to change what their
reporters were saying from the field and
in the case of National Public Radio
rike arranged for meetings there to put
pressure on the reports that were coming
out there were reason there were fairly
honest reports and fairly good reports
about contra atrocities this was when
that's when the Nicaraguan Contras were
involved in in serious desk one actions
to NPR had done a particularly offensive
story to the administration about a
village which had seen many of the of
the men slaughtered in a in a contra
atrocity and the story had been about
this the funeral of these men and so
Otto Reich goes over to to NPR and and
is allowed to sit down and sort of
harangue the the producers and edited
reporters involved and and the foreign
editor Manning Paul Allen was later
pushed out of NPR and one of the reasons
cited was this report so so across the
board
reporters were seeing that if they told
the truth about these areas that the
administration wanted not the truth not
told about they were putting their
livelihoods and their careers on the
line and and fewer and fewer people were
willing to do that talk more about the
the structural relationship in in DC
with between the press corps and the
administration well there's this there's
this false image that many people in
Washington like to pretend that there's
this very adversarial press and it keeps
it sort of watchdogs the the people in
power and that comes out of the
Watergate period where reporters like to
fashion themselves or fancy themselves
as Woodward in
and steen the reality has grown very
different whether it was ever that way
is a question but certainly by the mid
80s the relationship between those
reporters still standing and and the
Reagan administration got cozier and
cozier and there are many people in the
Reagan administration who were very
press savvy very PR savvy they came out
of advertising and they're very slick
operatives like Jim Baker who was
especially good at massaging the egos of
editors and bureau chiefs so you'd have
this kind of cozy friendly let's have
dinner together relationship between the
top brass of these elite organizations
and these kinds of officials so more and
more you saw even the papers that are
fall or wrongly characterized as liberal
The Washington Post for instance yet
very much in bed with the Reagan and
Bush administration's which had further
effects on journalists because you felt
you know if you ever if you ever
actually pushed a story that that Ronald
that Ronald Reagan or George Bush or Jim
Baker didn't like the next thing you'd
see is your bureau chief would be
sitting down at the hay-adams restaurant
with with Jim Baker and they'd be Ted of
heading and and you know and what comes
out of those kinds of things is oh this
guy is a problem you know he's kind of a
he's off on a tangent he's got a agenda
you know and and those kinds of things
really have an effect there was also
another technique that was used
especially on the women who were in
Central America and that was that the
the public diplomacy guys would go
around to editors and say we heard that
you know your report your correspondent
in Honduras or Guatemala El Salvador was
sleeping with a communist sleeping with
a KGB agent sleeping with the Sandinista
and that kind of character assassination
proved very effective because you know
personal most cases the reporter
wouldn't even know it happened maybe
until years later and and secondly
there's no way to disprove it
you can't sort of prove you never did
something over a long period of time
like that so so you'd have this so no
evidence would be presented against you
but these whispering campaigns would be
mounted and then they'd a date surface
in The Washington Times the unification
Church own newspaper it would surface in
accuracy and media it would
and all these in this very powerful
right-wing media that was being built
during this time and that the right-wing
media now rivals in many ways the
corporate media for influence in
Washington it's not as big and not as
much money made but it is very big and
it's very powerful and if you're a
reporter who come who is targeted by
those groups you know you don't stand a
chance you you will be purged from your
professions the iran-contra scandal was
an elaborate arms and money deal
involving the United States Iran Israel
Saudi Arabia and the Nicaraguan Contras
how did you get the story well as I said
in 81 I was on a special assignment team
at AP and I was left to pretty much
decide what I wanted to do and I thought
well Bill Casey seemed like an
interesting character and the CIA stuff
was kind of interesting and and the
Central America stuff was hot so I just
sort of gravitated to what I thought
would be an interesting story plus I was
picking out very quickly that they were
lying about their Central America
material remember the was even December
of 1980 before Reagan actually came into
office when the four American church
women were raped and murdered in El
Salvador and I saw how the how Jean
Kirkpatrick and others misrepresented
that how the administration or the new
incoming administration lied about it
and so it was clear that they were that
they were it was gonna be a gloves off
kind of approach toward people in
Central America who weren't toeing the
line and I thought that would be an
interesting story to follow and so I did
be and that led me mostly through the
Central America side of it to discover
Oliver North I first met him in 1983 we
had done we had lunch together at the
hay-adams restaurant and a rather fly
chat and at that point I realized this
guy who was a rising star at the
National Security Council at that time
was sort of out of control already so I
kept an eye on him and I was also doing
stories about the stories about the
assassination manual that the CIA
prepared for the for the Contras and I
had done a number of stories about you
know how CIA personnel had actually
engaged in combat with the center of the
Sandinistas in secret so there are a lot
of stories that we were getting onto the
why
at AP there were really important
historical stories and and then in in
early 85 I was given the Polk award or
some of the work and I was a finalist
for the Pulitzer and we did not we were
one of the three finalists for national
reporting and we didn't get it and Walt
Ramirez who was then executive editor of
AP took me out to lunch in New York and
and he said basically let's go back at
him you know what's what's the story
that'll win the Pulitzer and I said well
Walter there's this guy at the NSC named
Oliver North and I think it seems to me
from what I'm picking up he's running
this war and the the Congress had cut
off the funding for the Contras at this
point and I said this would be a this
could this could win a Pulitzer and so
he said what do you need and I said I
recommended that Bryan Barger who was in
a freelancer to be brought on board to
help out on the story and that was done
and we started pursuing this more
aggressively I did the first story on
North in June of 85 based on some White
House sources and some sources in the
Contra movement it was pretty sketchy it
was that you know North was involved in
fundraising and other activities beyond
the what he what they were saying he was
doing for was the first reference in any
story to turn north by October of 85 80
85 I had written that Ronald Reagan had
approved these secret operations by
North in December of 85 we reported that
the Contras were involved in drug
trafficking this was you know Brian
Barger did much of the heavy reporting
on that and and then by the spring of 86
we reported that there had been a
federal investigation that had been
squelched into the contra operations and
then in June of 86 we had a piece with
24 sources describing the North
operation how used front people
intermediaries Rob Owen and so forth to
handle some of these contacts so much of
the story was already on the record or
is out there was you know AP had running
on the wire and it was that story that
led in August of 86 for the House
Intelligence Committee led by Lee
Hamilton to go over to the White House
and they sat down with North and they
said Colonel North we there are these
allegations that you're secretly running
this war and what about them he said
oh they're not true and they said well
thank you very much for sorry we
bothered you and they and they what came
out and they called me and they said we
investigated your story and it didn't
check out you know you were wrong and at
this point with the Democrats now
joining in this this operation the Brian
was on the overnight which is not a nice
thing to be on a tape a you work all
night and he was sort of pushed out of
the company I was in the dog house I'd
sort of gotten it wrong you know and but
you know my my record was such that they
weren't him like get rid of me they just
kind of you know you've sort of guys on
a limb kid and you blew it and that's
where we stood we've been beaten one of
the things that's interesting about
going back to Iran Contra was that those
early stories had been discredited and
destroyed by a combination of the lying
at the White House the right wing media
attacks on all of us Washington Times
accurate the accuracy and media types
the Brent Bozell is the Wall Street
Journal's all these right-wing
publications had attacked us and
misrepresented the facts and had helped
destroy us as as effective journalists
but as luck will have it
history is not so easily contained and
even though we'd lost even though
Congress was then persuaded to renew the
Contra funding they approved a hundred
million dollars for the CIA to go back
into the business of trying to overthrow
the Sandinista government one of the
last planes an Oliver Norris operation
the last flights was being flown in on
October 5th of 1986 and the plane went
of left yellow pango Airport in El
Salvador and flew down the coast over
Costa Rica then back up into Nicaragua
to drop weapons to the Contras and and
on that Sunday morning there was this
teenage Sandinista draftee the kid and
he had a SAM missile and was a Russian
made one so who knows what would happen
with it and he had never fired one
before in his life and so he he remarked
later when he would sort of debrief
publicly that he aimed it at the plane
and fired it and was
and was amazed that the the missile went
at the plane and it hit the plane and in
the back of the plane the door the the
cargo door was open and one of the guys
one of the Americans who had been former
CIA named Eugene hasenfus was preparing
to kick out some guns so he had his
parachute on and he was near the open
door and and as the plane spiraled to
its death he was able to sort of push
his way to the door and push his way
away from the plane and parachute down
and he was captured and from his
statements that you know word later when
she made publicly a couple days later
the truth about the North involvement
with the Contras began to come out I
would I flew down there at that time I
was at the Haas and first news
conference in Managua and he of course
said things like the George Bush and his
office were involved the CIA was behind
this and that and then and then phone
numbers that were found on board his
plane were traced to North's eventually
to North's office so by October of 86
for no really no thanks to the
Washington news media no thanks to the
national press corps really except for a
few of us who tried to do some stuff
this major historic event came out if it
hadn't been for the kid with the missile
though there's no reason to think it
ever would have come out and that's how
close our history was to having been
falsified on a major issue now what
happened after that was sort of
interesting because then a month later a
Beirut newspaper not again an American
newspaper not one of the wealthy
high-powered American journalism kind of
outfits but a little paper in Beirut
runs us runs a story about how the US
has been trading arms for hostages and
then we get into the investigation of
the Iran side of the operation now the
arms for hostages component of this
story that wasn't something you had an
inkling of well we had an inkling of it
I should say
but the AP was in a very tough spot here
because Terry Anderson was an AP
correspondent who had
been kidnapped on the streets of Beirut
and one of the terrible historical
ironies here is that while we Brian
Barger and I were investigating on North
for his contravene management was
meeting with him to see if he could help
negotiate the release of Terry Anderson
and that of course was a very high
priority and rightly so for the AP but
it put them in a terrible conflict of
interest where my bureau chief who's
editing the stories I was writing about
Oliver North he's meeting with Oliver
North and asking basically for him to
help the AP get this guy out so you know
it was one of these just very difficult
moments and I'm not sure that it's easy
to make a call here as to which way you
go but because of those contact which I
began to hear about by the spring of 86
as our stories encounter we're
encountering more and more trouble
internally at ap one of the reasons I
was I learned was that there was this
back-channel relationship with Oliver
North that the management had but we
still were pushing our stories forward
and getting them out as best we could
and and I must say to the APS credit um
most of the stories we wrote sometimes a
bit watered down but they made it out at
that time you know we were able to
succeed more often than we fail does the
what's called the October Surprise does
that figure into this equation well in a
way the of course the October Surprise
story is goes into whether or not there
was a prequel whether there was a prior
relationship between the Republicans and
the Iranians that go back to before the
1980 election where as you remember
Jimmy Carter was president there'd been
hostages taken in Iran then 52 Americans
and Carter was trying to get them out
prior to the election to sort of help
himself get reelected and there was oh
there been allegations from a number of
people that that the Republicans
particularly bill Casey who was then
directing the Reagan campaign and
possibly George Bush who was the vice
presidential candidate were having
contacts with with Iranians to either
frustrate or prevent that release to
make sure Carter would not get reluctant
Regan wood so those those questions had
always sort of they'd floated around a
little bit at the point we're talking
about in 86 but in 80 but what's
interesting is that as the the story
begins to unfold in fall of 86 we have
that point in uh November 25th of 86
when Mies when attorney general Meese
comes out and announces the iran-contra
connection that money had gone from one
to the other and at that point I think
my god the story is finally gonna really
come out you know the big boys the big
in the media the boys are gonna come in
really now and get this truth and the
Democrats in Congress will do their job
and that was my biggest mistake of all
thinking that would happen but at that
point the battles that inside AP had
gotten so so had gone on for so long
over these things that when I was
offered a job at Newsweek I I left AP
and went there my first week there in
February of 87 we did the for a cover
story the first story I wrote there was
about how there was a cover-up being run
of iran-contra out of the Oval Office at
that point the Oval Office was trying to
say North did it on his own that became
the fallback position north cold with
the fall guy position so was this the
sort of the the loose canon rogue
elephant right yes this was the idea
that Ally had sir had done this with no
one knowing it yeah we have that a war
was being run out of the the old
executive office building next to the
White House and that the CIA the NSA the
DIA and all those other guys we pay a
lot of money to had somehow missed that
a war was being waged out of the next
door to the White House now that may
have seemed incredible and was but it's
what became the the position accepted by
the Democrats the same Democrats lee
hamilton and there's those kind of guys
who had covered up for north in the
summer of 86 are brought back in 87 to
run the iran-contra investigation they
tell their staffs they tell the staff in
early 87 this will not go to ronald
reagan ronald reagan was not implicated
got it and so basically some of the
staff almost resigned at that point some
of the investigators because they knew
they were being told to fix an
investigation but as this thing plays
out on national tell
vision and so forth the the fix was in
the Democrats had already agreed they
didn't want to have a constitutional
crisis over this no one wanted another
Watergate as they said and so the the
fall guy position takes takes over and
and so we come out of the summer of 87
North is now sort of folk hero the but
he's blamed for running this operation
with basically no one knowing about it
bill case he's dead now so he can be
tossed in as one of the fall guys too
but Reagan wasn't really that
responsible Bush was out of the loop
there was no contra drug trafficking
this cover-up had moved to a different
level so we so we're faced with that I'm
at Newsweek Newsweek buys on and
institutionally to that line I'm told
I'm off way off base thinking that Bush
was in the loop that there's a cover-up
going on must be sort of a conspiracy
nut so my I recently reached the point
at inside Newsweek that in 88 when I was
trying to show Bush's connection to the
iran-contra operations usually got more
and more hostile at the highest levels
to my work he reached the point in 89
after Bush is elected I was told by
Newsweek that that the Oliver North
trial was not a news story I was
forbidden to cover the North trial of
course it turned out to be a major news
story we weren't there I arranged to
cover the North trial by having
transcripts daily transcripts prepared
and then every night at 11 o'clock some
guy would show up on a motorcycle at my
house in Arlington Virginia and I'd get
the day's transcripts and I'd read what
was happened that day in the courtroom
and I developed stories off of that but
but news we could pretty much decide
this was no longer a story and that if I
thought so I must be not worthy of being
in mainstream media so I leave Newsweek
in 1990 ironically I'm sorry I'm trying
to work on my first book fooling America
and I get a call from PBS Frontline
Marty Smith is on the line and he's one
of the pretty senior producers and and
he said gee Bob we'd like you to look at
this October surprise question because
at this point there have been more and
more in
crest and whether or not there was that
tie in going back to 1980 and I was very
hesitant to take it on because I'd been
through enough I was tired I was beaten
up I didn't want to ruin my reputation
any further hurt and but I agreed to
take it on you're listening to Robert
Perry on the art of investigative
journalism this is alternative radio you
can get copies of this program by
calling the following toll-free number
one eight hundred four four four
nineteen seventy seven stay tuned at the
end for complete details on ordering and
so they gave Robert Ross was a very
talented producer based in New York City
we got a high eight camera and we're
sent off to Europe to interview people
and around the world and we did we're
lugging our stuff through airports all
over the place and we developed some
very interesting information not
conclusive that there what had been in
an October Surprise interference but
information led us in that direction
some information went the other way so
we tried to deal with it in a very
nuanced fashion at frontline and our
show appeared in ninety in April of 91
about the same time Gary SiC did his
op-ed piece for the New York Times
saying he thought something had happened
between the Republicans and the Iranians
and this of course again raised new
questions for George Bush since Bush was
possibly implicated in those allegations
and those were serious crimes by any
standards because if if private citizen
George Bush was just running for office
at that point and private citizen
William Casey had taken part in these
actions it was very serious business and
of course in 91 George Bush was the
sitting president with roughly ninety
percent approval ratings coming out of
the Persian Gulf War so we were sort of
doing something that was sort of flying
in the face of a lot of power and I
think frontline deserves a lot of credit
for having taken it on but all I got was
a lot of grief a lot of the efforts of
the Republicans to cut PBS funding some
of it goes to this the neoconservative
press rolled in
a New Republic Isle pals at Newsweek who
were still sort of mad at me I guess
decided they just they trash this whole
thing and did they got all the facts
wrong it turned out they the the newer
the New Republic in Newsweek pieces
which came out in November of 91 said
that they had alibis for Bill Casey that
bill Casey could not have been at one of
the key meetings in Madrid Spain because
they had him in in London that day when
we looked at the actual facts it turned
out that they had the wrong days in the
case he was not in London when they put
him there he arrived a day later he
could have gone to Madrid but those
stories which were based on that false
alibi were extremely influential and
they led most of the media to conclude
was a myth the Republicans then tried to
block any investigation in the Senate
Bob Dole now running for president led a
filibuster to stop a Senate
investigation and successfully did so
although there was a small scale thing
that was still done by the Subcommittee
on the Foreign Relations side and then
and the house side they did approve
narrowly an investigation but then Lee
Hamilton my old friend Lee Hamilton is
appointed to run the investigation and
he was out and he hires Larry Barcella
who was a former federal prosecutor but
who also was BCCI's top attorney to to
run the investigation and what we now
know is that BCCI was deeply implicated
in those events in 1980 they were
financing some of the people this is a
bank
yeah BCCI is the is the bank of credit
and commerce international which was a
middle-eastern based bank which was
involved in the 70s in bribing some of
the Carter people ie
Bert Lance for instance secretly taking
over first American Bank which is a
major bank in Washington using Clark
Clifford the esteemed wise man and his
associate Robert Altman as their front
men and and BCCI was deeply connected to
to arms trafficking and to drug drug
money laundering through their
connections in Pakistan and other places
where this was a major problem and and
we all we knew from the iran-contra
stuff that that bill Casey had used BCCI
in the 83 84 85 period
for his iran-contra activities what we
now will we've now learned is that is
that BCCI was active in 1980 with the
Republicans in helping to funnel funnel
money to key suspects in the and what's
known as the October Surprise issue so
we have but to cut this sort of shorter
in the the the house task force agreed
with us that the Newsweek in New
Republic alibis were bogus but then they
created bogus alibis of their own they
place Casey and the know that key day in
late July instead of in London they put
him at the Bohemian Grove all places in
California and Cal in Northern
California at this exclusive men's
resort and it turned out we looked at
those facts actually actually front line
we already looked at those facts and we
we had learned that Casey was there but
not there that weekend but the following
weekend the the house task force got the
wrong alibis again another alibi they
used they said they said well someone
had written down bill Casey's home phone
number on a certain day so therefore he
was home but the testimony was that the
guy had called the number and there was
no answer and when I approached Barcella
with this and I said Larry how can you
how can you do an alibi that somebody is
is is at home just cuz someone wrote
down their home number it doesn't make
any sense and but they didn't care at
this point they knew they could roll us
and they rolled not just us but American
history they falsified the American
history so but they got away with it and
and I sort of dropped it at that point
but the last phase of this was that year
so ago I was told that the Iranians had
approached the Clinton people we're now
into the Clinton administration early on
and said listen you know we did deal
with the Republicans in 1980 and this is
from the Robson Johnny highest levels of
the Iran government conveyed through
intermediaries to Clinton it went to the
problem to the President himself the
president decided that it wasn't worth
following up on
this was old stuff you know we don't
where we're focusing like a laser beam
on the economy etc etc
so they never pursued it but I went to
that led me to go back to the original
raw files of the House Task Force which
I had thought had done a bad job anyway
and I got access to these files in an
obscure storage room and supposedly just
the non classified stuff and I started
ripping open the boxes it was actually a
abandon or unused ladies room off the
Rayburn parking garage on Capitol Hill
it was still the tampon dispenser on the
wall you know it's really quite a scene
and there were these boxes lying and I
started open him up and and not only was
there the unclassified stuff but they
left behind
apparently by accident secret and top
secret material and so I started taking
up these documents and they were
remarkable they were like secret FBI
wiretaps of one of the suspects which
showed the three million dollar payment
being arranged for him by a Bush
associated lawyer and the fall of 1980 a
payment being brought to this Iranian
who was supposedly working for Carter
named I named the guys name is Cyrus
Hashem II a payment that BCCI was giving
to him via Concorde through a courier
obviously a cash payment what is Conklin
account the concorde the there was a
flight coming in from europe aboard the
concorde this is not the normal way you
make deposits in the world you know
usually that's usually like it's like a
wire transfer or something but but
anyway BCCI was flying in money by a
Concorde tube line this guy's pockets
this is the Houston lawyer calls back
after the election and tells Cyrus
Hashmi oh we're gonna fix
we've I've talked to Bush in the bush
people will fix your one of your
business problems for you after the
inauguration so there was all this there
was a lot of evidence that was pointing
to actual guilt on the October Surprise
issue which the House Task Force had
systematically left out they had I found
secret testimony from a CIA man named
Charles Cogan who was the top CIA man in
the Middle East he was at a he testified
that he was at a meeting with Casey and
Joe Reed who was a rockefeller a David
Rockefeller associate who became
ambassador to Morocco in 1981 and at
this meeting in 81 at Langley at CIA
headquarters Cogan says they opened up
the conversation where Joe Reed says to
Bill Casey we sure
blanked Carter's October Surprise didn't
wait and that was all left out I mean so
in your view is this has this evidence
that you've accumulated over the years
has it moved beyond the tangental stage
to you know very solid and irrefutable
well your reputable is a hard thing to
say but I do think it's it's the
evidence is now very strong that bill
Casey interfered with the hostage
negotiations in 1980 and that there was
a major miss rioting falsification of
American history that was carried out as
part of this larger cover-up that has
been going on for years now about what
happened in the 1980s and again the the
national press corps has failed
miserably to deal with any of these
questions beyond ridiculing them
we now have extensive government
documentation supporting the Casey
theory of interference in 1980 at the we
also have there was a statement from the
head of French intelligence who was
Alexandre de Mirage who was head of
French intelligence in 1980 he told his
biographer
that he had set up the meetings for
Casey in Paris with the Iranians there
were three French intelligence officials
corroborating that and this of course
matches with some of the allegations
from a couple of more unsavory sources
but they threw that all out based on
utterly implausible and in false alibis
for Casey and a couple other people they
this was not a serious investigation it
was a cover-up and I guess to the
Republicans wanted it to protect the
legitimacy of the reagan-bush period the
Democrats just I suppose didn't want to
have a big fight like they didn't want
to have a big fight over iran-contra
over contra drugs or over all the other
things that were going on in the 80s so
timidity on the part of the Democrats
and I think self-interest on the part of
the Republicans led to these these
cover-ups and of course Larry Barcella
who Larry Barcella was so conflicted on
this investigation he headed it yet he
was he'd made over two million dollars
representing BCCI as of not only a
lawyer but a lobbyist he had and VCC is
all over these documents in 1980 all the
BCCI material was kept out of the report
barcel was also law partner with
Senator Paul Laxalt Senator Paul Laxalt
was was was Reagan's intamin in 1980 and
in finance chairman for the 1980
campaign all the material that points to
lakhs all their substantial amounts of
information that lacks alt had worked
with with Marcos in the Philippines
raising money for the 80 election that's
all left out and Larry Barcella was also
close friends with Michael Adeem who was
a national security figure in this
period who is also implicated in the
according to these documents in the 1980
stuff and latine stuff is left out so
there's a systematic pattern of where
this was this investigation was not
handled properly now one of the salient
features of the October Surprise is the
extraordinary coincidence of the release
date of the hostages the hostage the 52
American hostages who were held at the
US Embassy in Tehran well right they
were they were released almost
immediately after Ronald Reagan was
inaugurated president now there you can
one can look at that and say was a
coincidence and it might have been a I
don't have as much information about
exactly why that timing was and I think
it's it may be a mistake to sort of to
try to tie that into closely what what I
think is important is to stick with the
evidence that we have amassed and it is
damning that there was interference on
the part of the Republicans and it's
also it's also disturbing the way that
the Congress dealt with us and the way
the washington press corps dealt with it
and refusing to seriously look at these
facts the famous watergate question was
what did the president know and when did
he know it what did Reagan know about
the iran-contra the arms for hostages
deal well I
Reagan was much more player in all this
than we people now think people it was
funny because up till 86 everyone said
Ronald Reagan was in charge he was this
and he'd proven that you you know that
the presidency was not too big a job for
a man that was the 84 line but then
after iran-contra he was like oh you
know what he was doing he was asleep
that became the line to protect him from
impeachment was sort of the diminished
capacity defense if you will my view is
that Reagan was on these issues was
much involved was alert wasn't was
interested approved things at fairly
detailed levels and I think he has to
carry a lot of the blame for what went
went on I think another another
interesting Watergate comparison though
and which was which is very disturbing
to me and I think historically important
is that in Watergate as imperfect as the
investigations may have been they led to
an accountability the president was
removed from office for committing
crimes no man was above the law the
Constitution works those were the kinds
of things we came out of Watergate with
certainly but not all the answers now
not all the questions were answered but
that's was the that was the overriding
result in iran-contra the opposite was
true we had a case where a president
committed felonies the arms Export
Control Act was violated they were we
dealt with terrorists there was in
violation of international law and in
relation to Nicaragua all those things
went down but instead of having really
the the senior people of that
administration held accountable and they
were all implicated and I mean not just
the president but the Vice President the
Secretary of State the Secretary of
Defense down the line they were
implicated and they and they misled
Congress they lied to Congress and they
basically got away with it
and when judge Walsh the Independent
Counsel on this indicted caspar
weinberger the defense secretary the
Washington news media attacked judge
Walsh for so ruining the fun of
Washington why is he doing this isn't
this all retired of this was sort of the
media response so what came out of
iran-contra was that the people who got
punished the most who were discredited
would for like judge Walsh for doing a
fairly honest job young people like me
for trying to report it honestly the
message becomes don't tell the truth
join the cover-up and and and really to
this day no one in the Reagan Bush
period was seriously held accountable no
one went to jail I guess it was one one
low CIA guy who did go to jail Tommy
Klein's but none of the key players went
to jail some got slaps on the wrist
others were made into folk heroes like
Ollie north so there was no
accountability and the fact that we came
out of the 80s with all these crimes and
and I include there the war crimes in
Central America there were hidden and
covered
up and lied about nobody paid a price
and when that happens to a society it
has terrible effects overall and I think
much of the reason we now have this
terrible distrust in America and this
met this sort of this feeling of unease
and and and anger is that people know
the big guys get away with whatever they
can and and you can't hold them
accountable now the public doesn't
understand all what happened or how it
happened cuz no one's really explained
it to them but they do get it in a
fundamental level it plays out in
strange ways sometimes but I think they
realized that the game is fixed one of
the notions that became current during
this entire period was plausible
deniability
what's that possible deniability is
something the CIA developed as the
concept which was that if you could
somehow fashion a lie to cover your
actions that was okay and that you could
do something and when if you get caught
you just say you didn't do it and
there'd be enough there be enough
muddied water around it so you know one
could prove it
and in fact what we saw happened during
the 80s was a whole bunch of those kinds
of plausible deniability things where
you had major crimes being committed and
then people saying well Oh el mozote a
yes I guess it turned out that that they
did murder all those kids because if a
fillip to finish that part in 1991 the
UN went into el mozote a and excavated
the site and found all the skeletons
including the children the little tiny
skeletons and and so at that point it
would it was incumbent upon the media
and on the and on the Congress to hold
the people who lied accountable it was
not done the basically it was considered
to all who cares but when a war crime is
committed at that level as we've seen in
in Bosnia in the United States rightly
objects to that and rightly wants to
prosecute and punish the people
responsible for those crimes but what
can be said when the United States
government covers up aids and abets the
kind of war crimes we saw in senton in
Central America and El mozo ta is the
most proven case and US officials lied
to Congress about what they knew on that
matter and none of the
have been held accountable CIA covert
operations and drug trafficking have
been a rumored earn alleged to accompany
each other
Alfred McCoy wrote a classic book the
politics of heroin heroin where he
documented those allegations in
Indochina and later in Afghanistan in
Pakistan those same allegations come up
again in the CIA operations involving
Central America there were reports of
guns South drugs north for example
contra supply planes flying arms south
and coming back with cocaine and landing
extraordinarily if these reports are
accurate at US air force bases is there
any evidence to back that up well yes I
mean as I mentioned earlier the first
contra drug story was done it by the AP
Brian Barger and I wrote it in December
of 1985 and we had solid evidence then
we didn't go with the story based on
just speculation the we did not pursue
it that much further because of the
attacks we came under we ap was not
eager to go forward with that story but
and and in the again the administration
the Reagan administration denied it and
said nothing happened and so forth but
what an interesting fact occurred which
explains this that that there was a
problem with a man named Manuel Noriega
and he came under indictment
no he was then the leader of Panama and
he was deeply implicated in the drug
trade and the United States indicted him
for his involvement in the drug trade
and in fact the United States invaded
Panama in 1989 to arrest Noriega we
killed at least a few hundred other
people while we're doing the arrest and
we brought Noriega back to Miami
now Noriega had been recruited by the
CIA to help fund the Contras and many of
the allegations that Brian Barger and I
have been picking up in 85 related to
Noriega as pilots flying their drugs and
guns from Panama to to the contra
operations in Costa Rica and Honduras
and then flying the drugs on to the
United States so here we have those
allegations we have Manuel Noriega
indicted and arrested in Miami but the
US government was in phase with the
problem he didn't want to admit the
Contra drug thing it happened yet the
witnesses who who had been saying the
Contra drugs had happened were the same
ones who are implicating Noriega and
there was no strong case that could be
built against Noriega unless they used
those witnesses but those witnesses they
had said were lying about the Contras
because the Contras are for the founding
fathers they wouldn't be doing drugs so
the so what happened is there was a
strange sort of bifurcation of logic
these these witnesses were brought to
were brought and put on the stand in
Miami to prosecute and convict Noriega
and they were Kadeem credible when they
described Noriega 'he's involvement with
the drug trafficking but they were also
deemed uncredible when they said that
these flights involved guns to the
Contras and were assisted by the Contras
so the US government sort of had its
cake and ate it to it was that it was
but it's obviously you know illogical
and irrational but they did it they said
these guys are credible when they say
Noriega did it they're not credible and
said the Contras were involved and of
course Noriega was convicted and sent
away for a long period of time there was
never any follow-up to to prosecute the
Contra people who were also implicated
by the exact same people who testified
against Noriega one of the characters in
the background during this whole period
of of the 80s is Colin Powell
how does he factor in the iran-contra
scandal well : Powell was was the
military assistant to Caspar Weinberger
who was defense secretary and was and
and general Powell was much more
involved in iran-contra than people
understand in a sense you could argue
that the iran-contra scandal could not
have happened but for Colin Powell his
involvement has been wildly
underreported under acknowledged for
various reasons partly his party's
popularity but he basically set up a
first one in 1985 when the illegal armed
shipments
going forward through Israel to Iran
that these were in violations of the
arms Export Control Act colon Powell
clearly based on the evidence we now
have was knowledgeable about that that
those illegal shipments and when asked
about them under oath later denied
knowledge his testimony is simply not
credible based on the evidence in 1986
when Reagan finally issued an executive
order of an intelligence finding that in
a sense legalized quote-unquote these
shipments : Powell then Gerry
jury-rigged the the the supply
operations to enable the missiles the
tow missiles and the hawk missiles to go
forward to her to Iran outside the
normal channels that the Pentagon had
for handling covert shipments that the
Pentagon had put in relatively new rules
to provide some kind of checks and
balances on covert shipments Powell
basically waived those rules and and set
in motion these these deliveries that if
the Pentagon people who were responsible
had known would have stopped a POW was
able to circumvent the controls so that
the shipments went forward so he was he
wasn't just sort of following orders
which is sort of his last line of
defense I was just a military man
following orders he was you know even in
an innovative fashion was aiding and
abetting these shipments both the ones
that were illegal and the ones that were
sort of quasi legal but and he's been
able to dodge responsibility in the
Walsh final report on on iran-contra he
is criticized for giving what's
considered misleading testimony Walsh
was being I think rather mild in his
comments Powell was actually giving
testimony that was blatantly untrue and
after working for Weinberger Powell had
a major promotion well he left the
Pentagon in 1986 for a while to go to a
military base to be to move up in the in
the in the pecking order of the military
and then came back in after the Iran
Contra scandal broke in 87 to be deputy
national security advisor and then 88 to
become national security adviser
during that time he played a very sort
of a let's say it's almost a sinister
role in in both covering up for the
iran-contra scandal and pressuring
Congress this is after iran-contra but
he press help pressure Congress he
essentially bullied members of Congress
to try to get money for the Contras
again in 87 and 88 there were tremendous
efforts to renew funding for the Contras
and at the center of it was Colin Powell
even though at that point the World
Court had found the Contra operation of
violation of international law
there were major questions about human
rights violations massacres of the
Contras had carried out and and the
problems with the Contra drug
trafficking but Powell examined none of
them in real and simply went ahead and
pushed for more money for the Contras to
fight the war have you had an
opportunity to ask him questions about
this I've submitted questions to him
about this in connection with a book
project that I was working on he did not
respond you've launched a new
independent project what's that about
and how how can people find out about it
partly because I had all these documents
that I couldn't find any home for I mean
this the the documents I found in the
ladies room on October Surprise were
really compelling and they were
top-secret and I used to be stuff that
you'd get on the front page of
newspapers but I couldn't find anyone
who wanted them because they had like
made October Surprise connected to them
somewhat so I said oh no we can't do
that and I went around to a bunch of
publications I I started calling these
files the October Surprise x-files and
finally I just said well I'll do it
myself I'll see what I can do and I
decided to use the Internet to anchor
this operation and I also wanted to
offer it as a newsletter kind of eye of
stone ish so people who didn't like the
internet or didn't didn't have access to
it could also get it and I called it the
consortium it publishes bi-weekly and
we're selling the newsletter by
subscription the the newsletter can be
obtained if anyone's interested it's for
a year's subscription we're now doing
$49 per year you also get a free copy of
one of my books if you subscribe and
which book is that well you can get
trick or treason which is the book I did
that explained the October Surprise
story I'm also doing a little monograph
of the first eight issues take
the October Surprise x-files and putting
them together and people can have their
pick you know if they want one of the
other they can get both if they like and
we would and so we so you can send a
check or money order if you want to the
media consortium it's at suite 102 231
2200 Wilson Boulevard Arlington Virginia
to to 201 again very slowly well the
media consortium is located at suite 102
- 231 2200 Wilson Boulevard Arlington
Virginia
- - 201 thanks very much Bob thank you
David you were just listening to
award-winning reporter Robert Perry on
the art of investigative journalism I
talked with him at the media and
democracy Congress in San Francisco on
March 2nd 1996 as you just heard Robert
Perry is editor of the consortium a new
independent bi-weekly investigative
newsletter this program is produced by
alternative radio celebrating its 10th
year of national and international
broadcasting they are brings you such
diverse voices as Howard Zinn Barbara
Ehrenreich Winona LaDuke frances fox
piven
and Orvis yvette bard order for the
program you just heard I'm David Barr
Sam Young thank you for listening